In the West, a lot of people don't understand exactly what it means to do a retreat, and they don't
understand why someone would go away.
Could you talk more about how we can relate skillfully to people in our own lives to help them
understand the importance and the meaning of the retreat,
so that way they aren't feeling hurt or neglected by our commitments?
Generally, people who come to retreat, I think, definitely they already know some sense of retreat.
That's why they came, but maybe they don't know exactly that.
The retreat, as I think I mentioned, retreat in the Indian world, in Tibet, is called "Sam". "Sam"
means really you are stopping on all the mundane activities,
mundane activities of the body, mundane activities of the speech, mundane activities of the mind,
and so that is you are really retreating and stopping that.
When you are retreating, what activities can you do? Perfectly that. Then, instead of mundane
activities of the body, you start with that,
and then in the Tibetan Buddhism, what is the body? According to the body activity of the retreat,
and then some Dharma activities.
Sometimes, for example, the "Sakkama Ambulance", the body, "Sakkama Ambulance" to the stupas, or
the temples, and the ball stations.
Ball stations, all those are known as amidicis, and then there are also many other things, but I
won't talk, but those are like the body activities, such as that.
And then, speech activities, again, stopping all those, the speech, verbal muddings, verbal
activities, and stop that,
and do the speeches, such as reciting mantara, chanting the prayers, and reading sutras.
And then, those are known as the mundane, stopping the mundane activities of the speech, and
engaging to the spiritual verbal use, using those things,
with the spiritual or the Dharma things. And the mundane activities of the mind is then, again,
trying to stop preventing all the emotions,
all the negative emotions, negative, these are negative emotions, stopping all the negative
emotions,
and cultivate more positive thoughts, joy, appreciation, love, kindness, compassion, and bodhicata.
And then, really, those are brain, devotion, those are brain, more than what it will do, it will
bring mind.
What it brings, more calm, more peaceful, more soothing, more calming, and in mind that happens, it
will really kind of igniting,
it is radiating that energy to the channels, to the wings, and to the physical level.
And then our bodies will become also relaxed and calm in that, so cultivate that.
Those are generally kind of external levels of the retreats.
Then, particularly, zoki retreat, then really engage into the meditation, as we are all doing,
doing that,
trying to do more meditating, more practicing, follow the according, the instruction, and follow
our schedules, that we can do that.
And not kind of interfering, you know, interfering each other, others practices that, so everyone
kind of encourage each other, practices,
not interfering, such as, this is the break, the time, time, and one come for one month, all at one
week, two weeks,
and that's really dedicated for that. So therefore, really cultivating that as much as we can, and
supporting each other,
and that is not it then, kind of helping and supporting, and not kind of like, also preventing or
diluting,
but just let everybody do the practice, the meditate, whatever they can do.
That is like their own way of activating that. So those are that, I will say, I think.
It's okay if I ask one more question?
Yes.
But for those who aren't in retreat with us, so for those who aren't in retreat with us,
so like if we're doing like an extended retreat, and there's loved ones that we have to step away
from,
what are skillful ways to relate to those who don't have the connection to Buddhism, maybe,
but they're still affected by us being in retreat?
Those who are not in retreat, right?
Family.
So like family or loved ones?
So I think that they know already, they know that you're doing retreat, and I'm sure they're
morally supported,
supporting that, and so they know that. But then you're in retreat, that's how we do prayer.
Bodhicitta prayer. So we're doing these practices, not just only for ourselves,
but really, at the very beginning, we started with bodhicitta,
thought where we sent it based and prayed towards them.
At the end, we dedicate the merit, and also we wish everyone affected by our merit and our joy,
and not just only our merit, as we wish that all the bodhisattvas, in light of being,
their blessings are also merged with our prayer, our wishes, and then went to those all beings.
So they kind of like, we kind of like send that to everyone, everyone.
Our prayers and our merit, and as well as their blessings over all the bodhisattvas, to everyone.
Thank you very much.